
AWS Certification Roadmap
    Cloud Developer ( Developer associate ) => DevOps Engineer Site reliability Engineer ( DevOps Engineer Professionals ) => DevOps Cloud Security engineer ( Security Specialist )

# Exam Details
    The exam of questions in 4 Domains
        1. Domain 1 ( 24% ) : Cloud Concepts => 15-16 Questions
        2. Domain 2 ( 30% ) : Security and Compliance => 19-20 Questions
        3. Domain 3 ( 34% ) : Cloud Technology and Services => 22 Questions
        4. Domain 4 ( 12% ) : Billing, Pricing and Support => 7-8 Questions

    Passing Grades = 700 out of 1000 ( Min  70% )
    Exam Duration = 1.5 hours ( ~1.5 mins per question )
    Exam time = 90 mins 
    Seat time = 120 mins

    Certificate validate for 36 months ( 3 Years )

    There are 65 questions
        50 scored questions
        15 un-scored questions : They are not count in final score

    Can afford 15 wrong questions ( no penalty for wrong questions )

    Formate of questions
        Multiple Choice 
        Multiple Answers

# AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner Certification Course
1) Computing power
    he through put measured at which a computer can complete computational task.
    Types:
        1) General computing 
        2) GPU computing    
        3) Quantum computing

        AWS offers
        1) Elastic compute cloud - EC2
        2) AWS Inferentiare (Inf1)
        3) AWS Braket

# Benefits of cloud
    1) Agility
    2) Pay as you go
    3) Economy f scale
    4) Reliability
    5) Security
    6) Scalability
    7) Elasticity
    8) High availability

# AWS Developer Associates Certification Course
    AWS Global Infrastructure
        1) Regions
        2) Availability Zones
        3) Data Centers
        4) Edge Locations
        5) Local Zones

    # AWS Regions
        There are 32 regions 
        Not all services available in all regions
        All your billing information appears in region US-EST-1 ( North- Virginia )
        The Cost varies per region

        While choosing region consider 
        1) What cost of AWS services in that region
        2) What is the latency of data transfer to my end-users
        3) What are the services are available in that region 

    # Regional services and global services
        Regional services
            AWS scopes their AWS management console to select a specific region.
            All the resources created in that region are visible in that region only.
            Example: EC2, RDS, Lambda etc.

        Global services
        Some AWS services are available across all regions and that specifies as" global"
        Eg. S3, CloudFront, IAM

    # IAM Section
        IAM => Identity and Access management, Global service
        Root Account created by default , shouldn't be shared or Used 
        Users are peoples within your organization, and can be grouped
        User can belong to Multiple groups

        1) Users:
            Users or Groups can be assigned JSON document which called Policies
            These Policies defines permissions to User 

        Creating User steps
        1) Login to AWS console
        2) Search IAM User
        3) Click on Create user button
        4) Enter User name
        5) If you are creating IAM user for yourself then can give AWS console access. Otherwise don't give
        6) If you creating user for others then select autogenerated password options and check User must create new password at next sign-in.

        When you create a group with attached policy and add any user in that group. Then that user also gets attach that user policy.
        No need to attach manually policies to that user.

        Tags : Are help to Identify, Organize  resource

        You can add account alice to user custom name while accessing IAM user 

        IMP: IAM user groups only contain IAM users.

        To login With IAM User
        1) Go to AWS console
        2) Click on Sign in
        3) Click on IAM User
        4) Enter your IAM Account_ID/Alice_Name, username and password

        # IAM Policy inheritance 
            All user policies are inherit from group policy
            You can create group and attach policy to that group and then add user to that group. Then that user will automatically inherit that group policy.
            You can attache policy to user directly but that is not recommended because it is hard to manage and track.
            
            IAM policy structure
            1) Version: policy language version ( required )
            2) Id: Identifier for the policy ( optional )
            3) Statement: List of statements that define the policy ( required )

            If we attach direct policy to user then that policy and that policy known as inline policy.

            We can also create own policies with our custom permissions.

            Statement consist of
            1) Sid: Statement ID (optional)
            2) Effect: Wether Statement Allow or Deny Access (required)
            3) principle: account/role/user to which this policy applied to
            4) Action: list of actions that can be performed
            5) Resource: list of resources which can be applied to eg. your s3 bucket ect.
            6) Condition: list of conditions that must be met before the policy is applied ( optional )

        #IAM Password policy: In AWS you can setup password policy

    # Ways to access AWS account 
        1) AWS Console: password + MFA
        2) AWS CLI: Access Key ID
        3) SDK: Access Key ID ( for code )
            Access keys ~= username 
            Secret Key ~= password

        Create access key steps
        1) Go to IAM
        2) Click on user
        3) Click on security credentials
        4) Click on create access key
        5) type aws configure
        6) Enter access key id and secret key

        permissions are work same on  CLI and console
    
    # AWS CLI on windows
        1) Download AWS CLI from official website: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html
        2) Install AWS CLI
        3) Open command prompt and type aws --version to check if it is installed properly
        4) Type aws configure to configure your access key id and secret key

    # AWS CLI on Linux
        1) Open terminal
        2) Type command: curl "https://awscli.amazonaws.com/awscli-exe-linux-x86_64.zip" -o "awscliv2.zip"
        3) Unzip the downloaded file: unzip awscliv2.zip
        4) Run the installer: sudo ./aws/install
        5) Verify the installation: aws --version
    
    Configure AWS CLI
        1) Open terminal or command prompt
        2) Type command: aws configure
        3) Enter your AWS Access Key ID, Secret Access Key, Default region name and Default output format
        4) start accessing AWS services using CLI commands

    # AWS Cloud shell
        AWS cloud shell id CLI tool present in aws console.
        It is available only in few regions.
        It is same as AWS CLI

    # IAM roles for services    
        Some AWS services will need to perform actions on your behalf
        IAM roles for services allow you to grant permissions to those services

        Common roles
        1) EC2 instance role
        2) Lambda function role
        3) Roles for cloudformation

        Steps:
        1) Go to IAM
        2) Click on roles
        3) Click on create role
        4) Select service
        5) Attach policy/permissions
        6) Review and create

    # IAM Security tools: you get full report on your IAM users and their permissions
        1) IAM credentials report ( account level)
            a report list all your account users and status of their various credentials
        2) IAM access advisor ( user level )
            Access advisors shows you the services permissions granted to user and when those services last were access.
        you can use this info to revise your policies.
            - go to user 
            - click on last accessed

    # Shared Responsibility Model for IAM 
        AWS level:
        1) Infrastructure
        2) Configuration and varlnerability 
        3) Compliance validity

        User level
        1) Users, groups, Roles, Policies management and monitoring
        2) Enable MFA
        3) rotate all access keys
        4) Use IAM tools to apply Appropriate permissions
        5) Analyze access pattern and review permissions  

    # AWS Budget setup
        Used to get alert when your AWS cost exceeds your budget
        1) Go to AWS cost and usage report
        2) Click on budget 
        3) Click on create budget

        Enable AWS billing access to IAM user
        - Go to account settings
        - Click on IAM user and role access to Billing information -> edit
        - Select "Activate IAM Access"

    # Amazon EC2(Elastic Computing Cloud) - Infrastructure as a service ( IaaS )
        features
        1) Rent Virtual machines (EC2)
        2) Storing data as virtual drives ( EBS )
        3) Distributed Load Balancer (ELB)
        4) Scaling the service using Auto Scaling group (ASG)

        EC2 sizing and configuration options
        1) Operating system(OS) : Linux, Windows, ios
        2) How much memory(RAM) and CPU do you need
        3) How much storage do you need
            1. network attached ( EBS and EFS )
            2. hardware ( EV2 instance store ) 
        4) Network card speed: Speed of card and public IP
        5) Firewall rules: security group ( How network traffic allowed to reach your instance and leave your instance )
        6) Bootstrap script(Configure at first launch): EC2 user data

        eg.
            #!/bin/bash
            # use This for your user data (script from top to bottom)
            # install httpd (linux 2 version)
            yum update -y
            yum install -y httpd
            systemctl start httpd
            systemctl enable httpd
            echo "<h1>Hello world from $(hostname -f)</h1>"> /var/www/html/index.html


        ## EC2 User data script 
            It is used to Bootstrap EC2 instance.
            Bootstrapping means to launching commands at first launch
            This script runs only once at first launch
        
        EC2 user data script used to automate boot task such as:
            1. Installing updated 
            2. Installing software
            3. Downloading common files from internet, etc.
        
        EC2 User data script run with Root user 

        .pem => used when you have windows 10, mac and linux system
        .ppk => used when you have windows system less than windows 10

        EC2 public IPv4 is is used to access EC2 instance
        EC2 private IPv4 is used to access EC2 internally on AWS Network

        EC2 Instance naming conventions
        eg. m5.2xlarge
        m: instance class
        5: generation ( AWS improves them over by time )
        2xlarge: size of instance class

        EC2 Instance Public IP address:- used to access EC2 instance from internet. 
        IMP-Public IP get changed when you stop and start the instance again. If you want to have static public IP address then you can use Elastic IP address.
        
        EC2 Instance Private IP address:- used to access EC2 instance internally on AWS Network

        EC2 instance Types
        1) General purpose
            1.Great for diversity of a workload such as webservers or code repositories
            2.Balance between:
                a.compute
                b.memory
                c.network
        
        2) Compute Optimize
            Great for computing intensive tasks that required high performance processors
                1. batch processing workloads
                2. Media transcoding
                3. High performance web servers
                4. High performance completing (HPC)
                5. Scientific modeling & machine learning
                6. Dedicated gaming servers
            Server those start with "c" eg. c5, C6gn
            
        3) Memory Optimize
            1. fast performance, relational/non-relational in-memory database
            2. Distributed web scale cache stores
            3. In-memory databases Optimize BI(Business Intelligence)
            Server those starts with "r" eg. R5, R6g

        4) Storage Optimize
            1. Great for storage intensive tasks that require high, sequential read and write access to large data set on local storage
            2. Use cases
                a.High frequency online transaction processing (OLTP) systems
                b.Relational & no-relational database
                c. Distributed file systems
                d. cache for in memory database ( redis ect. )
                e. Data wear housing applications
            Server starts with "i", "t" etc

        ## Security groups and classic ports overview
            1. Security groups are fundamental of network security in AWS
            2. They control how traffic allowed into or out of our EC2 instances
            3. Security groups contains only allow rules
            4. Security group rules are refer by Ip or by security group.
            5. Security groups are acting like "Firewall" on EC2 instance
            6. They regulate:
                a. Access to ports
                b. Authorized IP ranges - IPV4 and IPV6
                c. Control of inbound network ( from other/outside to instance )
                d. Control of outbound network ( from instance to other/outside )
            7. Security groups can be attached to multiple EC2 instances
            8. Locked down to region/VPC combination
            9. Does live outside of EC2 - if traffic is blocked by security group, instance will not see it.
            10. It's good to maintain a separate security group for SSH access.
            11. All inbound traffic blocked by default.
            12. All outbound traffic allowed by default.
            13. If your application is not accessible( time out ), then it's be security group issue.
            14. If your application gives "connection refused" error, then it's application error ot it's not launched.
            
        ## Classic ports
            1. 22 - SSH(Secure shell) - log in to linux
            2. 80 - HTTP - Access unsecure web server
            3. 443 - HTTPS - Access secure web server
            4. 3389 - RDP(Remote desktop protocol) - log in to windows instance
            5. 21 - FTP - file transfer protocol - uploads files into file share
            6. 22 - SFTP - Secure file transfer protocol - upload files using SSH

        ## SSH connect chart
            ssh: linux, mac, windows >= 10
            putty: windows >= 10, windows < 10
            EC2 instance connect: with all above
            
            SSH allows you to connect remote machines

        ## Steps to connect to EC2 instance on Mac
        1. Open terminal
        2. Type ssh -i "your_pem_file_path" username@<public_ipv4_address>
        3. If don't have permission then type chmod 0400 <Your_PEM_FILE_PATH> 
            ( Using the chmod command with the argument "400" grants only the owner or user of the file read permission while restricting everyone else entirely )
        4. then again type ssh -i "your_pem_file_path" username@<public_ipv4_address>

        ## Steps to connect to EC2 instance on Windows using putty
        1. Download putty from official website
        2. Open putty
        3. Putty authentication works only with .ppk file, if you have .pem file then convert into .ppk file using putty gen convertor to private key.
        4. enter hostname as instance_username@<instance_public_ip_address>
        5. enter port as 22
        6. click on connection --> ssh --> auth from left side options menu
        7. then upload your .ppk file in privet key file for authentication input
        8. click on open button to connect to instance
        Note: also you can save your session info into putty and you can load that session for future use.

        ## Steps to connect to EC2 instance on Windows using SSH
        1. Open powershell
        2. Type ssh -i "your_pem_file_path" username@<public_ipv4_address>
        
        ## Steps to connect to EC2 instance on EC2 instance connect
        1. Go to EC2 dashboard
        2. Select your instance
        3. Click on connect

        To give permission to connect to EC2 instance, use IAM role for EC2 instance and 
        attach "EC2 Instance Connect" policy to that role and then attach that role to your EC2 instance. This will allow you to connect to EC2 instance using without access key( aws configure ).

        ## Attaching IAM roles to EC2 instance
        1. Go to EC2 dashboard
        2. Select your instance
        3. Click on actions --> security settings --> Modify IAM role
        4. Select your IAM role
        5. Click on save changes
        Note: Never configure aws credentials in your ec2 instance using EC2 connect with access key and secret key. Instead use IAM roles for ec2 instance.

        ## EC2 purchasing options
        1. On demand: Short workload, predictable pricing, pay by seconds
            a. Linux and windows: Billing per sec, after first minute
            b. All other Operating Systems: billing per hour
            c. Highest cost, no upfront payments
            d. recommended for short term 

        2. Reserved :
            a. Reserved instances: Long workload, lower pricing, pay upfront
                1. up-to 70% discount compared on demand
                2. specific instance attributes ( region, instance type, OS, tenancy)
                3. Reservation period: 1 (+discount) to 3(+++discount) years 
                4. Payment options: No upfront(+ discount), partial upfront(++discount), all upfront(+++discount)
                5. Reserved instances scope: regional OR zonal
                6. Recommended for steady workload eg. database
                7. You can buy or sell your reserved instance in marketplace

            b. Convertible reserved instances: Long workload with flexible instances
                1. up-to 66% discount compared on demand
                2. Can change EC2 instance type, instance family, OS, Scope, tenancy

        3. Saving plans: Commitment to amount of usage, long workload
                1. Get discount based on long-term usage ( up to 70% discount)
                2. Commit to certain type of Usage ( $10 per hour for 1-23 years)
                3. Usage beyond EC2 Saving Plan is billed at the on Demand price 
                4. Locked to specific instance family & region
                5. Flexible across: Instance size, OS, tenancy(host, dedicated, default)

        4. Spot instances: Short workload, lower pricing, can loose instance
            a. Instance will loose if max price is less than current spot price
            b. Can be used for batch Jobs, data Analysis, Image processing, any distributed workloads, workload wth flexible start and end time
            c. Not suitable for database or critical workload
            
        5. Dedicated hosts: Book an entire physical server
            a. Purchasing options
                1. On demand: pay as per sec for dedicated host
                2. Reserved: 1 or 3 year
            b. Useful for companies that have strong regulatory and Compliance need

        6. Dedicated instance: No other customer will share your instance
            1. Instance runs on hardware that is dedicated to you
            2. May share hardware with other instance with sam account
            3. No control over instance replacement

        7. Capacity Reservations: Reserved capacity in a specific AZ for any duration.
            a. You always have access to EC2 when you need it
            b. No time commitment: (Create/Cancel anytime), no billing discount
            c. to get discount you need to combine with regional reserve instance and saving plans
            d. You charged at on demand rate whether you run it or not

        ## AWS charges for IPV4 creation 
            You will charge $0.005 per hours for each IPV4 address that you create in your VPC whether you use it or not
            You can delete unused IPV4 address to avoid charges

    # Amazon EC2 Instance Storage Section 
        What is EBS volume 
        EBS is a high-performance, persistent block storage volume for use with a single EC2 instance (like a virtual hard drive in the cloud). 
        Think of it as a super-reliable, network-attached SSD/HDD that you can attach to a running server.
            1. An EBS ( Elastic block store ) volume is a network that you can attach to your instance while the are running
            2. It allows you to persist data, even after the instance is terminated
            3. they can only be mounted to one instance at time( at ccp level )
            4. They are bounded to specific availability zone.
            5. We can attach one EBS volume to another instance.
            6. It's a network file ( not a physical drive )
                a. It uses network to communicate with the instance, means there might be latency
                b. It can be detach from instance anytime and quickly attached to another instance.
            7. It's Locked to availability zone
                a. An EBS volume n US-EAST-1A can not be attach to US-EAST-1B
                b. To move volume across availability zone, you need to create snapshot and restore it in another availability zone
            8. Have a provisioned capacity (Sizes in GiB, and IOPs)
                a. you get billed for all provisioned capacities
                b. You can increase the size of the volume over time
            
        Note: You can control EBS delete on EC2 instance termination - select no in delete on termination 

        # EBS Hands on
            1. go to EC2 dashboard
            2. click on Volumes from Elastic Block Store
            3. click on create volume
            4. select the size of the volume
            5. Select availability zone
            6. Click on create volume

        # Attach EBS volume to instance
            1. Go to EC2 dashboard
            2. Click on volume
            3. Click on actions
            4. Click on attach volume
            5. Select the instance
            6. Select the device name
            7. Click on attach

        Note: You can select delete on termination while creating instance. This will delete the EBS volume when the instance is terminated.

        # EBS Snapshots
            1. Make backup of EBS volume at any point in time
            2. Not necessary to detach volume to do snapshot, but recommended
            3. Can copy snapshot to across region or availability zone.

            Features:
                a. EBS snapshot archive
                    Move snapshots to an "archive tier" that is 75% cheaper.
                    Takes within 24 to 72 hours to restoring the archive.
                b. Recycle bin for EBS snapshots
                    Setup rules to retain deleted snapshots that you can recover them after accidental deletion.
                    specify retention ( from 1 day to 1 year ) 
                c. Fast snapshot Restore (FSR)
                    force full initialization of snapshot with no latency.
                    But this is costly
                    You can use this when volume is big, and you need to restore it quickly.

            # Hands on Snapshots
                1. Go to EC2 dashboard
                2. Click on Volumes
                3. Select snapshot
                4. Click on actions
                5. Click on create snapshot
                6. Select the description

                Also you can copy snapshot to other instance
                1. Go to EC2 dashboard
                2. Click on Volumes
                3. Select snapshot
                4. Click on actions
                5. Click on copy snapshot
                6. Select the destination region
                7. Select the destination availability zone
                8. Click on copy snapshot

                Mount volum on Attached EC2
                1. Login with attached EC2
                2. type command lsblk - list all volumes/disk space
                3. command: sudo file -s /dev/new_volume_partition_name = dev(because we using external storage) --> this will attached volumes file system to new EC2
                4. sudo mkdir /mnt/your_dir_name --> create valume mounting directory name
                5. sudo mount /dev/new_volume_partition_name /mnt/your_dir_name ( sudo mount disk_name destination_name)
                6. sudo unmount -l /mnt/your_dir_name

                Enabling Recycling Bin for EBS Snapshots
                1. Go to EC2 dashboard
                2. click on snapshots
                3. click on Recycle bin
                4. create rule
                5. select the retention period
                6. click on create rule

        # AMI (Amazon Machine Image)
        An AMI is a template or blueprint that contains the information needed to launch an EC2 instance. 
        It's like a snapshot of a configured server.
            This can be use to create copy of one instance
            An Amazon Machine Image is a pre-configured template that provides the nessasary information to launch EC2 instance in AWS.
            It includes 
                a. opearting System
                b. Application server ( ngnix etc. )
                c. pre-installed software and configurations 

            1. AMI are a customization of EC2 instance
                a. You add your own software, configuration, operating system and monitoring
                b. Faster boot/configuration time because all your software is pre-packaged
            2. AMI are build for specific region ( and can be copied from across region )
            3. You can launch EC2 instances from:
                a. A public AMI: AWS provided
                b. Your own AMI: you make and maintain them yourself
                c. An AWS Marketplace AMI: an AMI someone else made ( you can buy and use someone's made AMI )

            # AMI process (From EC2 instance)  
                1. Start the instance and customize it
                2. Stop instance (for data integrity) 
                3. Build AMI - This will also create EBS snapshot 
                4. Launch instance from other AMI 

            # hands on AMI
                1. Go to EC2 dashboard
                2. select instances
                3. click on actions
                4. select image and template
                5. click create image
                6. enter image name, decription and save
                7. Click on My AMI
                8. Select the AMI
                9. Click on launch instance from AMI
                10. enter EC2 name
                11. choose configuration
                12. launch

            Note: You can select existing key pair and also network settings

        types of AMIs
        1. Public 
        2. private
        3. paid AMIs/Marketplace AMIs: provided by third parties

        EC2 templates
        You can create templates of EC2 and using AMIs. and launch direct from template.

        TODO: Explore EC2 Image builder pipeline
        
        # EC2 instance store
            1. it used as replacement of EBS if you need higher performance hardware drives
            2. EBS volume are network drives with good but  "limited performance.
            3. EC2 instance store losses storage if instance they'r stopped.
            4. Good for buffer, cache, scratch data, temporary content
            5. backup and replications are your responsibility

        # EBS volume Types
            1. gp2/gp3 (SSD) : it is with balanced price and performance for wide variety of workloads
                - cost effective storage, low-latency
                - system boot volume, virtual desktops, Development and test environment
                - 1 GiB to 16 TiB per volume
            2. io 1 /io 2 Block express : highest performance SSD volumes for mission critical, low-latency and high performance volume
            3. st 1 (HDD) : Low cost HDD designed for frequently access throughput-intensive workload
            4. sc 1(HDD) : Lowest cost HDD volumes for less frequently access workload

        # EBS volume type use cases:
            1. provisioned IOPS ( PIOPS) SSD
                - critical business applications with sustained IOPS(Read/Write operations) performance
                - Or applications that need more than 16,000 IOPS
                - Great for databases workloads( sensitive to storage performance and consistency )

                - io1 type of volumes ( 4GiB - 16TiB)
                    - Max PIOPS per volume: 64,000 for nitro EC2 instance and 32000 for other 
                    - Can increase PIOPS indepenadlty from storage size
                - io2 type of volumns ( 4GiB - 64TiB)
                    - Sub-millisecond latency
                    - Max PIOPS: 256,000 with an IOPS:GiB ratio of 1000:1
                - Supports EBS multi-attach
            
            2. Hard Disk Drives (HDD)
                - Cannot be a boot volume -  primary storage device that contains the operating system
                - volumn size- 125 Gib to 16 TiB
                - Throughput optimized HDD (st1)
                    - Max throughput per volume: 500 MiB/s
                    - Great for big data, data warehouse, log processing
                - Cold HDD (sc1)
                    - For data that is infrequently access
                    - scenarios where lowest cost is important
                    - Max throughput per volume: 250 MiB/s - max IOPS 250

            # Multi Attach volume for EBS
                - Attach the same EBS volume to multiple EC2 instances in the same availability zone
                - Each instance has full read and write permissions to the high performance volume
                - Use cases:
                    1. Achivee higher applications availability in clustered linux applications
                - Up to 16 EC2 Instance at time
                - Must use a file systme that's cluster aware ( not XFS, EXT4, etc ) 

        # Amazon EFS -( Elastic File Systems )
            - Managed NFS ( Network file system ) that can be mounted to multiple EC2 instances
            - EFS works with EC2 instances in multi availability zones
            - Highly available, Scalable, expensive(3x gp2), pay per use

            - EFS use cases:
                1. Content management
                2. Web serving
                3. Wordpress
            - Uses NFSv4.1 protocol
            - Uses security group to control access to EFS
            - Only compatible with linux based EC2 instance ( not windows )
            - Encryption at rest and using KMS
            - POSIX file system ( ₹Linux ) that has a standard file application
            - File system scales automatically, pay-per-use, no capacity planning

            # EFS - Performance & Storage Classes
                1. EFS scale
                    - 1000s of concurrent NFS 

            # EFS - Storage Classes
                1. Standard: For frequently access data
                2. Infrequent Access: For infrequently access data, cost to retrieval file, lower Price to store
                3. Archive: Rarely access file, 50% cheaper

                Availability and Durability:
                1. Standard: Multi availability AZ, and great for prov
                2. One zone: Great for dev, backup enabled by default, compatible with IA ( EFS only Zone-IA )

    #AWS ELB(elastic load balancer) and ASG
        Vertical Scalability:- 
            1. Vertically scalability means increasing the size of instance.
            2. VS is common for non-distributed systems such as database.
            3. RDS, Elastic cache are services that can scale vertically.

        Horizontal Scalability:-
            1. Horizontal scalability means increasing the number of instances/systems for your application.
            2. HS is common for distributed systems such as web servers.
            3. EC2, Lambda are services that can scale horizontally.

        High availability:-
            1. High availability means your application/system in at least 2 data centers (==Availability Zones)
            2. Goal is to survive a data center loss
            3. Auto scaling group and load balancer are used.

        Elastic Load balancer:-
            are servers that forward traffic to multiple servers downstream.
            - When any request get on our application first it reaches to ELB( ALB-application load Balancer ) then ELB route it to available servers.
            - When you are working with web-servers you use ALB as load balancer

            A fully managed service that automatically distributes incoming application traffic across multiple targets (EC2 instances, containers, IP addresses).

            Type	                OSI Layer	            Best For	                                    Key Feature
            Application LB (ALB)    Layer 7 (HTTP/HTTPS)	Web apps, microservices, REST APIs	            Routes based on URL path, host, headers.
            Network LB (NLB)	    Layer 4 (TCP/UDP)	    Extreme performance, low latency, static IPs	Handles millions of requests/sec.
            Gateway LB (GWLB)	    Layer 3 (GENEVE)	    Virtual appliances (Firewalls, IPS/IDS)	        Transparent insertion of security appliances.
            Classic LB (CLB)	    L4 & L7	                Legacy (Avoid for new projects)	                Basic TCP/HTTP balancing (retired in progress).

            
            Health checks:-
                1. They enable the load balancer to know if instances it forwards traffic to are available to reply to requests.
                2. The health check is done on a port and a route (/health is common). If the response is not 200 (OK), then the instance is unhealthy

            1. ALB ( Application Load Balancer ) - 
                - load balancing to multiple HTTP applications across machines
                - support HTTP/2 and websocket
                - support redirect from HTTP to HTTPS
                - Routing:- 
                    1. Based on URL path ( /images goes to image server, /api goes to API server )
                    2. Based on host ( api.example.com goes to API server, www.example.com goes to web server )
                    3. Based on header and query strings ( if header contains "mobile" goes to mobile server )
                - Great for microservices and containerized applications

                Hands on:
                    1. Click on load balancer option from left sidebar
                    2. select ALB ( Application load balancer ) 
                    3. Enter name, select load balancer IP address type
                    4. Select network mapping 
                        if you want High Availability the select all availability zones
                    5. select security group ( same as EC2 creation for network rules )
                    6. Listeners and routing --> Listeners are use to add which target group(instances) you want to route your traffic to and how you want to route it.
                        - select protocol and port
                        - Create or select target group
                        target group are basically list of instance which you want to use as routes 

                        steps for creating target group:
                        1. choose target type, enter target group, select port ad protocol
                        2. register targets ( select instances which you want to include )
                        
                    7. Create load balancer
                    8. Copy DNS URL and run it
                    9. to debuge go into resource map section - will show your curent load balancer flow

                    Allowing only accessing EC2 instance through load balancer
                    1. Create security group for load balancer and allow inbound traffic on port 80 with source as load balancer security group
                    2. attache this security group to your EC2 instance and remove other security group which allow traffic from outside

                    Adding different listener rules to load balancer
                    1. Go to load balancer
                    2. Click on listener rules
                    3. Click on add rule
                    4. add name
                    5. Select condition - Path based, query string, host based, header based
                    6. add path
                    7. add action:
                        1. forward to target group
                        2. redirect to another URL
                        3. return fixed response ( eg. 404 not found )
                    8. set priority and save rule
                    
            2. NLB ( Network Load Balancer ) - 
                - Allowed TCP and UDP traffic to your instance 
                - handles millions of request per second
                - Great for extreme performance and low latency

                Target Groups
                - EC2 instances
                - IP addresses - must be private
                - Health checks supports - TCP, HTTP, HTTPS

                Hands on:- Same as ALB but select NLB in load balancer type

            3. gateway load balancer ( GWLB ) - 
                - Deploy, scale, and manage fleet of 3rd party network virtual appliances in AWS
                - Combines 
                    1.Transparent network gateway - single entry and exit point for all traffic ( uses GENEVE protocol )
                    2.Load balancer - distributes traffic across virtual appliances 

                Real example: A financial services company requires that all communication between production, development, and payment VPCs be inspected by a Palo Alto firewall. 
                GWLB routes inter-VPC traffic through the firewall without modifying application

            Sticky Sessions:-
                It is possible to implement stickiness so that the same client is always redirected to the same instance behind a load balancer
                • This works for Classic Load Balancer, Application Load Balancer, and Network Load Balancer
                • For both CLB & ALB, the “cookie” used for stickiness has an expiration date you control
                • Use case: make sure the user doesn’t lose h
        
                Cookie names:-
                1. Application based cookies
                    a. custom cookies:-
                        - created by target groups
                        - Cam include any custom attribute required by application
                        - Cookie must be specified individually for each target group 
                    b. Application generated cookies:-
                        - Generated by application and read by load balancer
                        - cookie name is AWSALBAPP
                    c. DUration based cookies:-
                        - generated by load balancer
                        - Cookie name is AWSALB for ALB, AWSELB for CLB

                Hand on:- 
                    1. GO to target group
                    2. Click on attributes and edit
                    3. Enable stickiness
                    4. Select cookie type and enter cookie name and expiration time
                    
            Cross-zone load balancing:-
                1. Application Load Balancer
                    - enabled by default, no additional cost for inter AZ data
                2. Network Load Balancer and gateway load balancer
                    - disabled by default
                    - You page charges for inter AZ data if enabled
                3. Classic Load Balancer
                    - disabled by default
                    - no additional cost for inter AZ data

                You can disable cross zone load balancing for target groups with instance targets.

        Load balancer security groups:-
            1. load balancer security groups:
                a. Control traffic allowed to reach load balancer
                b. Control traffic allowed to leave load balancer
                Http = PORT 80
                Https = PORT 443

            2. Application security groups:
                a. allowed only load balancer traffic with source ELB. PORT 80

        SSL/TSL:-
            An SSL Certificate allows traffic between your clients and your load balancer   to be encrypted in transit (in-flight encryption)
            1. SSL - refers to Secure Sockets Layer, used to encrypt connections
            2. TSL - refers to Transport Layer Security, which is a newer version

            - Public SSL certificates are issued by Certificate Authorities (CA) - Comodo, Symantec, GoDaddy, GlobalSign, Digicert, Letsencrypt, etc… 
            - SSL certificates have an expiration date (you set) and must be renewed

            Load balancer - SSL certificates
            - The load balancer uses an X.509 certificate (SSL/TLS server certificate)
            - You can manage certificates using ACM (AWS Certificate Manager)
            - You can create upload your own certificates alternatively

            SSL – Server Name Indication (SNI):-
                - SNI solves the problem of loading multiple SSL certificates onto one web server (to serve multiple websites)
                -  It’s a “newer” protocol, and requires the client to indicate the hostname of the target server in the initial SSL handshake
                - The server will then find the correct certificate, or return the default one
                - Only works for ALB & NLB (newer generation), CloudFront

                Hands on SSL/TLS with ALB/NLB:
                1. Go to Load balancer
                2. Click on Listeners and rules -> click on add listener
                3. Select protocol as HTTPS and port 443
                4. Select default action as forward to target group
                5. go to security policy 
                6. select certificate source EG. ACM ( AWS Certificate Manager )
                7. select certificate and save 

        Connection Draining:-
        Feature naming
            • Connection Draining – for CLB
            • Deregistration Delay – for ALB & NLB
            
            • Time to complete “in-flight requests” while the instance is de-registering or unhealthy
            • Stops sending new requests to the EC2 instance which is de-registering
            • Between 1 to 3600 seconds (default: 300 seconds)

    # ASG - Auto scaling groups
        Helps to auto scale up and scale down as needed. Scale up when more capacity needed.
        
        A service that automatically launches or terminates EC2 instances based on demand, schedule, or health checks.

        ASG Group Attributes:
        1. Launch template: Defines the configuration for new instances (OS, software, etc.)
            - AMI + Instance type
            - EC2 user data
            - EBS volumes
            - Security groups
            - SSH key pair
            - IAM ROLES
            - Network and subnet info
            - Load balancer info
            2. Min Size / Max Size / Initial Capacity
            3. Scaling policies (dynamic, scheduled, simple)
        
               
        The 3 Scaling policies:
        1. Dynamic Scaling (Most Common):
            -Target Tracking: "Keep CPU at 50%." AWS handles adding/removing instances automatically.
            -Step Scaling: "If CPU > 70%, add 2 instances. If CPU < 30%, remove 1."

        2. Scheduled Scaling (Predictable):
            - Anticipated a scaling based on known usage patterns 
            -Use case: Every Friday at 5 PM (payroll processing), scale to 10 instances. Sunday at 10 PM, scale back to 2.

        3. Simple Scaling (Manual/Reactive):
            -Triggered by a CloudWatch alarm (old method, less flexible)
            - An alarm monitors a metric
            - Based on Alarm
                1. We can create scale out policies ( increase number of instances )
                2. We can create scale in policies ( decrease number of instances ) 

        4. Predictive Scaling (Advanced):
            - continuously forecast load and schedule scaling ahead
            - Uses machine learning to predict future traffic and scales in advance.
            - Use case: Predicts increased traffic during a product launch and scales up before it happens.

        Metrics to scale on:
            1. CPU Utilization
            2. Request count per target ( per instance )
            3. Average Network in/out
            4. Custom metrics ( application specific )

        Scaling cooldown:- 
            • After a scaling activity happens, you are in the cooldown period (default 300 seconds)
            • During the cooldown period, the ASG will not launch or terminate additional instances (to allow for metrics to stabilize)
        
        NOTEE: If instance is unhealthy then ASG will terminate that instance and create new instance to replace it.    

        Hands on:
            1. Create instance image or instance template of your instance. 
            2. click create auto scaling group
            3. select launch template, if not present create launch template
            4. select version
            5. Choose instance launch options
            6. select availability zone and subnet
            7. Integrate with load balancing option - 
                1. No load Balancer
                2. attach an existing load balancer : Auto created instances are get automatically add to target group of load balancer.
                3. attach new load balancer
            8. enable EC2 and load balancer health check options
            9. Configure group size and scaling 
                - desire instances capacity // how many should run in normal state
                - add scaling capacity
                    1. min desire - min this need to be run
                    2. max desire - max this much you can run
                - automatic scaling - 
                    1. target tracking scaling policy - On basis of CPU or number of request should scale
                        - Metrix type - based on CPU usage
                                      - based on request
            10. Create autoscaling group

            IMP: Whenever you create ASG it does not manage existing instances, It creates new instances.
                
        Hands on Create launch template:
            1. Go to EC2 dashboard
            2. Click on launch template from left sidebar
            3. Click on create launch template
            4. enter name and description
            5. select AMI
            6. select instance type (eg. nano3 )
            7. select key pair
            8. select security group
            9. add user data ( optional )
            10. create launch template
    
    # AWS S3 bucket
        1. versionling - store files with differnt versions
            - edit s3 bucket properties
            - enable versioning
        2. Replication - Copy file one s3 bucket to another ( in same or another region)
            - go to bucket
            - go to management
            - replication rule - create replication rule
            - choose rule scope 
                - limit files 
                - apply all objects
            - select destination
            
        3. S3 bucket lifecycle rule
            - go to bucket
            - go to management
            - lifecycle rule - create lifecycle rule
            - select lifecycle rule actions
            - select storage class
            - enter expire time

        4. The AWS Snow Family
            is a collection of physical devices and edge computing services used for 
            securely and cost-effectively transferring large amounts of data to and from AWS, 
            especially when internet connectivity is limited or unavailable

            1. AWS Snowball: A petabyte-scale data transfer device that offers a range of options, 
                    including both storage and computing capabilities.
            2. AWS Snowmobile: A service designed to move exabytes of data, utilizing a 45-foot long, 
                    ruggedized shipping container that can hold up to 100 petabytes.
            3. AWS Snowcone: A small, compact, and rugged device for edge computing and data transfer 
                    in situations with tight space or weight constraints. AWS discontinued the service in November 2024, but continues to support existing customers until November 2025. 

    # DynamoDB
        Is NoSQL database, which store documents containing key pair values. ( same as MongoDB )
        Aws offers  free tier provides 25GB of storage. 

        Hands On
            1. Search DynamoDB -> create table
            2. enter partition key ( same as primary key )
            3. create item -> to insert data into table manually
            
            You can edit autoscaling capacity clicking on edit capacity
            You can create index through UI, take backups

        Key Points:
            1. Server less: no need of software installation, maintainance etc
            2. Automatic sclaling
            3. Zero DOwntime
            4. On Demand pricing
            5. Idle cost saving: Scale down to zero during inactivity

        DAX - DynamoDB Accelerator ( same as redis )
            1. Fully managed in memery cache for DynamoDB
            2. DAX offers microsecond latency
            3. High Availability: Can deployed in multiple AZ
            4. DAX is only for and integrated with DynamoDB 

            Global Table in DynamoDB - you can create from Your table -> global table -> Create replica 

    # Lambda
        Hands on:
        1. Search Lambda -> create function
        2. enter name
        3. select runtime
        4. create -> write code
        5. click on test 
        Note: On every code change you have to deploy it.
        6. Add trigger event ( eg. s3 bucket file upload )
        
    # AWS CloudeFormation IAC
        Hands on:
        1. create YAML or JSON template with all required configuration information
        2. search AWS cloudformation -> create task
        3. prepare template - ( choose existing, use Sample, build from infrastructure composer )
        4. choose template source -> next
        5. Review and submit
    
    # Amazon Route 53 - ( DNS default port is 53 so this called route 53)
        -AWS route 53 is scalable DNS service for domain registration, traffic routing, and health checking capabilities.
        -The Domain Name System (DNS) acts as the internet's phonebook, translating human-friendly domain names (like www.google.com) 
            into machine-readable IP addresses (like 142.250.190.46) that computers use to find and connect to each other
        
        Hands On:
        1. Search Route 53
        2. if you don't have domain you can registerr domain - It will create automatic HZ
        3. If you have already then you can navigate to create hosted zones
            - add domain name
            - select type ( public, private )
            - create
            - You will see two records
                - NS ( named server )
                - SOA
            - In your custom domain application edit name servers as per your NS record which are in AWS
            - In above step you defining on which servers application need to route when we hit our custom domain ( eg. www.mydomain.com )
        4. Create record - define rule when need to route
            - add record name - subdomain name
            - record type - A = domain name convert into IP
            - value - on which IP you want to redirect traffic
            - select routing policy
                - Latency - from closest server will serve application
                - IP-based
                - Geolocation
                etc.
            - create record

            Types of Records:
             1. A record - IPV4 - domain to IPV$ address
             2. AAA record - IPV6 - doman to IPV6
             3. CNAME record - maps domain name to another domain name
             4. MX record - Directs mail to an Email server

        Billing:
            - Billable Components - hosted zones, DNS queries, health checks, doman registration and traffic policies
            - cost based on usage and type of configuration 
        
    # CloudFront
        AWS's global Content Delivery Network (CDN), accelerating website/app delivery by caching static (images, CSS, JS) 
        & dynamic content at worldwide "edge locations," reducing latency for users by serving content from the nearest server, 
        improving speed, security (WAF, DDoS), and handling large traffic bursts efficiently for things like video streaming, 
        large file downloads, and APIs. 

        Hands ON:
            1. Search CloudFront -> Create
            2. choose origin - EC2 instance, S3, loadbalancer, Elastic IP
            3. Select Origin access
            4. Select root access - main file ( entry file )
            5. change/edit s3 bucket policy as per CloudFront policy
            6. copy couldfront domain name and you can access files from this
        